Hello and welcome to the Harvest Baptist Church sermon podcast.
We are honored that you would click on this and listen to God's word preached by one of our elders.
At the same time, we strongly affirm the biblical mandate for Christians to be a faithfully active and in-person part of their local church.
This sermon cannot and will not replace what a local church can provide to the life of a Christian.
That being said,
We hope that this sermon challenges and encourages you in your faith and that it builds upon the faithful ministry of your local church.
We hope that you enjoy God bless.
If you open with me and your Bible this morning to Exodus chapter seven.
Finally, we have got to the plagues.
I believe there are 10 plagues in all, but I want to separate the first nine from the tenth one, the death of the newborn son.
And I think they split up into three equal parts, the first nine.
And we're going to see what the first three have in common.
All of them have, we're going to see the magicians are involved in Pharaoh's magicians of the secret arts.
They perform, they're involved there.
The second set of three, four through six, they all have something in common as well where God is making a distinction between Israel and
And the Egyptian so there's a distinction made between the people and then the last three seven through nine They just come about they just happen.
Okay, they're not announced They just come upon and then the tenth one is all in its own.
It's really the climax of all of them So we're gonna break them down in that kind of way And so as we're thinking about the plagues we're all familiar with the Egyptian plagues and one boy what come to?
Sunday school and he came out and mom said, hey, what did you learn today?
I said about the plagues.
Well, what about the plagues?
Well, how did that go down?
Well, you'll never believe it, mom.
The Egyptian, the Israelites, they bombed the Egyptians houses and they went out in an army convoy and there was tanks escorting them and there was airplanes above.
But then they got to this big piece of water, this big body of water and they built a pontoon bridge across it.
And they set bombs alone.
So when they got across and the Egyptians came and Pharaoh and his army came, they blew it up.
Moses blew it up.
She said, that's what you learned in Sunday school.
He said, no, but you would never believe what they taught me in Sunday school.
So as we go here, there are plenty of liberal scholars.
There are plenty of
I would just say unbelievers who want to explain these plagues away.
Um, but we're, as we read the word of God and we see what really is at place here, we need to understand why that's really the big takeaway.
Um, we're trying to take from all of the whole book of Exodus narrative.
It's why the plagues, why did it, why did it happen like this?
And we're going to see over and over again, really two or three main reasons and God's going to spell that out for us and purpose statements for us to understand.
We need to know what it's not though.
This was not a personal vendetta on Pharaoh.
This was not, you know, Yahweh had a problem with Pharaoh, so he's just going to, you know, one-on-one take him out.
It's not that.
It's not class warfare, okay?
It's not, it's not God, you know, a lot of liberal theologians will say, this is proof that God is on the side of the poverty and the oppressor.
He has come to overtake the oppressor, and that's how God in the greatest sin always is oppression.
That's not what's going on in this story at all.
Now, the oppression is a sin, all right?
It is a sin.
However, to say that God is always against the oppressor, that's something quite hard to reconcile with Scripture.
Because God will use the Assyrians, He will use the Babylonians, and He will bring them to oppress His people.
He will send them directly because of the sins of His people.
So, that's not always the case, okay?
And that's not what's going on here.
That's not the main reason.
Okay.
We're going to see God's very clear here as we're going to begin to read at the end of X and seven.
This is so that you will know that the Lord is Yahweh.
He is the Lord.
He is the one and only God and he is redeeming a people to worship him.
It's not just being taken out of slavery.
He could do that easy.
That's not the point.
The point is to take the people out of slavery to worship and serve him.
The point is out of slavery and to worship him, from slavery to Sabbath.
That's kind of the whole way we're looking at this.
God is calling a people to himself.
And it's not that these people are, it's not, you know, God has a favor ethnic group.
That's not it either, right?
Because think about it.
Abraham was the first Jew and he was called out of the ear of the Chaldeans.
He was a pagan himself.
I mean, so it's not that this is God's favorite ethnic group.
That's not the point at all.
We are the whole world in this account and in God's redemption, you see the character of who the true God is, okay?
And he redeems his people and he wants his people to worship him rightly, okay?
And that's the whole point to worship God rightly, to understand who he is and worship him rightly.
So let's look at that together.
If you will, stand with me and the reading of God's word.
We pick it up in Exodus chapter seven and verse 14.
Then the Lord said to Moses, Pharaoh's heart is hardened.
He refuses to let the people go.
Go to Pharaoh in the morning as he is going out to the water.
Stand at the bank of the Nile to meet him and take in your hand the staff that turned into a serpent.
You shall say to him, the Lord, the God of the Hebrews has sent me to you saying, let
My people go that they may serve me in the wilderness, but so far you have not obeyed.
Verse 17, we get purpose statements throughout these plagues and here's one of them.
Thus says the Lord, by this you shall know that I am the Lord."
Or there it is.
This is why, you shall know that I am the Lord.
Behold with the staff that is in my hand, I will strike the water that is in the Nile and it shall turn into blood.
The fish in the Nile shall die and the Nile will stink.
and the Egyptians will grow weary of drinking water from the Nile.
The Lord said to Moses, say to Aaron, take your staff, stretch out your hand over the water of Egypt, over the rivers, their canals, and their ponds.
and all their pools of water.
Every bit of pool, not just the Nile, you notice that, it's not just the Nile, it's all the water throughout the land and ponds and basins and pools, all of it.
And there shall be blood throughout all the land of Egypt, even in the vessels of wood and vessels of snow, even what they're drinking, even what's in the kitchen.
Any liquid is blood.
Moses and Aaron did as the Lord commanded.
In the sight of Pharaoh, in the sight of his servants, he lifted the staff, struck the water in the Nile, and all the water in the Nile turned into blood.
The fish in the Nile died and the Nile stank, so that the Egyptians could not drink water from the Nile.
There was blood throughout all the land of Egypt, but the magicians of Egypt did the same by their secret arts.
So Pharaoh's heart reminded
remained hardened and he would not listen to them.
As the Lord had said, Pharaoh turned and went into the house and he did not take even this to heart.
And all the Egyptians dug along the Nile for the water to drink, for they could not drink the water of the Nile.
Seven full days passed after the Lord had struck the Nile.
Chapter eight, the Lord said to Moses, go in to Pharaoh and say to him, thus says the Lord, let my people go.
Is that it?
Let my people go?
No, there's more to it.
Let them go so that they may serve me.
If you refuse to let them go, behold, I will play all your country with frogs.
The now shall swarm with frogs that shall come up to your house and your bedroom on your bed and the houses of your servants and your people into your ovens, to your needing bowls.
What ingredients you got for bread?
What about some frog legs?
The frogs shall come
up on you and on your people and all your servants.
The Lord said to Moses, say to Aaron, stretch out your hand with your staff to the rivers, over the canals, over the pools, make frogs come up onto the land of Egypt.
So Aaron stretched out his hand to the water and the frogs came up and covered the land of Egypt.
But the magicians did the same by their secret arts and made frogs come up on the land of Egypt.
Notice this next part, verse eight.
Pharaoh called Moses and Aaron and said, plead with the Lord to take away the frogs from me, from my people.
I will let the people go to sacrifice to the Lord.
So we see a break in Pharaoh here in verse eight.
And Moses said to Pharaoh, be pleased to command me when I am to plead to you and to your servants and for your people that the frogs may be cut off from you in your house and be left only in the Nile.
and he said tomorrow.
In other words, give me a day, let me know Pharaoh when you want them gone and I'll make sure they're gone.
So you can know who will save you, who can make this go away, your magicians can't do it.
Okay, tomorrow, all right, let it be.
Moses said, be it is as you say so that you may know that there's no one like the Lord our God.
Verse 11, the frog shall go away from you and your house, your servants and your people.
They shall be left only in the Nile.
So Moses and Aaron went out from Pharaoh, Moses cried,
to the Lord about the frogs as he agreed with Pharaoh.
Verse 13 is so intriguing.
Look at verse 13.
And the Lord did according to the word of Moses.
Now we've been waiting for Moses to do according to the word of the Lord, but now the Lord did according to the word Moses.
Interesting.
The frogs died out in the house in the courtyards in the field.
They gathered then together in heaps and the land stank.
We see that again, don't we?
Verse 15, but the Pharaoh
But when Pharaoh saw that there was a respite, he hardened his heart and would not listen to them as the Lord had said.
The last plague we're going to look at this morning.
The Lord said to Moses, say to Aaron, stretch out your staff and strike the dust of the earth so that it may become gnat in all the land of Egypt.
or lice, some translations haven't, and they did so.
Aaron stretched out his hand with his staff, struck the dust of the earth, and there were gnats on man and beast.
All the dust of the earth became gnats in all the land of Egypt.
Now notice the magicians again.
The magicians tried by their secret arts to produce gnats, but they could not.
So there were gnats on man and beast, and the magicians said to Pharaoh, notice this confession.
This is the finger of God, but Pharaoh's heart was hardened and he would not listen to them as the Lord.
That's it.
Let's pray.
Father, any hearts that be hardened among us this morning, take them from a heart of stone, turn them to a heart of flesh.
May you give us ears to hear eyes to see and hands to obey.
We ask it and in for the name of Christ, amen.
All right, you may be seated.
I want us to start as we try to imagine these three plagues.
And I really just want to bring out really two points to you this morning.
Number one and overall, the victory of Yahweh.
That's what these plagues, these first three plagues really communicate to us is the victory of Yahweh.
As we notice the magicians in all three, the third plague, the plague of the night, that's the last time we see the magicians in all the plagues.
This is the end for them, okay?
And so we're gonna see their defeat and they represent the gods of Egypt.
So first, try to imagine this.
Now, the plague of turning the Nile into blood and we read where Jesus turned water into wine.
almost the opposite going on here.
And the Nile for the Egyptians was essential.
The Nile was the main way of transportation.
The Nile really, I mean, where Egypt is, it was a desert, is a desert.
But what would happen every year, the Nile would flood.
In the early spring, for a month or so, the Nile would flood into Egypt.
And it would flood, only I think in recent history, is their irrigation system in Egypt, because Egypt has always had the flood of the Nile.
And when the Nile would flood, it would make Egypt, and Oasis in the desert.
I mean, it made Egypt great for growing crops, a great place to live.
So when that flood would happen every year, that was, and it would make pools, it would make ponds.
I mean, it was great for farming.
So you have this desert land, and because of this flooding,
the Nile floods.
It makes Egypt this great place to live as far as in commerce and economics for agricultural reasons.
And so this Nile is essential to their economy.
It's essential to transportation.
The fish that are in it are essential to their diet.
I mean the Nile and they have plenty of gods okay that are in this Nile.
I mean that
One thing to understand about the Egyptian culture, they are polytheist and they have God, a God for everything.
Okay.
And the Nile had a ton of gods.
There were a ton of gods that protected the Nile and we'll talk more about them.
There was the God home, who was the guardian of the Nile.
Heady was the spirit of the Nile.
Neath protected the fish of the Nile.
Osiris was the God of the underworld, but the Nile was represented his blood.
So to speak to the Egyptians.
I mean, they had hundreds and thousands of God.
They were very religious people.
But imagine when God brought this plague upon Egypt.
Think about this for a minute.
It wasn't a bath bomb.
You know, I don't know about you, but children like bath bombs when they, maybe some of you, some of you men may like a bath bomb, I don't know.
But you know, you throw it in there, it changes the bath water colors and the kids love it or you enjoy it, whoever, enjoy all that.
But that's not this.
This isn't food coloring in the water.
Literally, it becomes blood, all right?
And so everything's ruined.
For seven days, they have nothing to drink.
They have to dig new wells to get fresh water.
So it's an absolute, it's a disaster.
God strikes, the first plague strikes straight at everything in Egypt, at the heart of everything.
And this is really a warning shot over the bow.
Pharaoh, I mean business.
I've crippled you in one act.
One move of the staff, I've crippled everything in Egypt.
Let my people go, this is serious business, okay?
Do this, all right?
And of course, we're gonna say Pharaoh, harness his heart.
them magicians what do they do they can replicate this okay they can replicate this now I mean I kind of it's a lot of this is pretty I mean God's got sense of humor in some of this for sure because think about these magicians there's no water to drink everything's blood and they have a little bit of water left they've dug up some hey watch this Pharaoh we can turn this into blood too oh that that was the last one great job
Thanks, guys, that was, yeah, yay, good job.
Yeah, now we got nothing.
All right, good job, guys.
So, I mean, even the way these magicians are acting or helping what God is doing, the judgment that he's bringing upon his people.
And imagine the second plague, frogs.
The frogs, the God Hoppy, I don't know where that comes, if that was intentional or not.
But when God brings the next plague, the plague of the frogs,
This doesn't seem like a big deal, right?
This doesn't seem like a big deal.
But God is striking.
Hoppy was one of the eight gods that they worshiped.
One of the main eight gods, of course, like I said, they had thousands.
But the frog, the frog god Hoppy, he's, of course, you know, putting a bullseye on that god, and it's the god of fertility.
Now you remember Pharaoh started this war by attacking the firstborn children of Israel, the male children of Israel, of the Hebrews.
and so
that the frogs were, I mean, everywhere you go, everything's slimy, right?
Everything, reptile's been all over the place.
And you slip and fall, and you've got, you know, you've got frog juice all over you, you've got slime all over you, but there's nowhere to rinse at all, right?
Because they're in everything.
They're in all the bowls, they're in everywhere.
You can't get away from it, right?
And think about this as an Egyptian.
Like I said, the Nile would flood
And with the Nile would flood, like I said, it would bring these ponds.
It would bring these little lakes, okay?
And they loved that for farming.
That was good.
And frogs would have been in those little ponds.
So frogs were a blessing.
And actually, it was against the law in Egypt to kill a frog.
Yeah.
So the Robertson's not welcome, right?
Like you can't.
There's no frog killing, there's no frog hunting.
They were holy creatures, because they represented the God, Hoppy, the fertility God, they were protected.
Like, for instance, you go to India, Nepal, you don't eat beef, it's against the law, like water buffalo is okay, but why?
Because Hindus, holy cow, holy cow, where does that come from?
They worship cows, right?
That's the highest form of reincarnation.
So you can't eat cow, eating beef is outlawed, right?
So they're holy, right?
So frogs to them were holy, it was a holy protected,
creature.
And now think about this.
By the end of this, frogs everywhere, they're going around killing them everywhere.
They've turned into frog snatchers and hunters.
It was against the law before this plague, and now they're killing them everywhere.
So their whole way of life has been flipped upside down by God just multiplying the frogs.
So you see how God is working.
in this plague and against their gods.
In the next plague, the third plague we're gonna look at, this plague of lies.
That doesn't seem like a, or gnats, okay?
They don't seem like a big ordeal.
Well, thank goodness we don't live in South Georgia, right?
Maybe they can inform us on how bad these can get, right?
But really, these gnats as aggravating as this could be, I can imagine we go to the beach sometime in New Smyrna around Daytona area in Florida.
And what they have popular there is what they call no seams.
You know, you walk out early.
One morning we were, while we were there last year, we wanted to go watch.
Amazon was launching a new rocket.
okay into orbit and Jeff Bezos we want to go see that thing go up about 6.30 in the morning they're launching that thing so we walk out to the beach just to you know down the way a few miles see it go and it was neat but it was hard to stand out there that morning watch it because there's no seams we're just eating us up I mean literally just a little not just all just you can't see them there's biting you everywhere and so they go away when the sun really gets up and it's not really that big a deal but here they're on everything these nats on everything and really this is also an attack on these priests
So the priest in Egypt, one thing about the, they represented their gods, of course, but these priests, they shaved all of their, all the hair on their body.
They had no hair on their body.
They would shave regularly and they would wear white robes and they would wash multiple times a day to be richly pure to perform their priestly duties to these, to all these gods.
And so imagine, as these nads are flying all over, and they're just killing them,
Their white garments are getting disgusting, so they're having to change multiple times a day.
They're having to take more bass than they could before, right?
And it's over and over again.
And something we didn't really look at or point out to you, there's so much in here.
You could almost go one plague at a time and one sermon at a time, but I just thought, how can we try to move through this just a little bit to kind of get the overarching points?
And one of the things you see throughout these plagues is that Moses comes and meets Pharaoh at the river.
Now Pharaoh is God of gods to them.
He is the chief God.
He represents the chief God Amun Ra to the Egyptian people.
Okay.
And he's going to the water to do some kind of relate to the Nile to do some kind of religious acts, some kind of religious worship in the morning.
And Moses meets him there.
I mean, you kind of almost
feel a little bad for Pharaoh in this.
I mean poor guys who go through these, he can't get away from Moses, gets up in the morning, just wants his cup of coffee, you know, go down to the river for a minute, have some peace, here's Moses.
Oh great.
Now you turn the Nile on the blood, that's great.
Alright, next day, hey just get a break man, can't go to the river, it's blood.
Now what happens, he shows up again, there's frogs everywhere.
shows up again, there's gnats everywhere.
I mean this guy Moses is getting on his nerves, Pharaoh's not getting a break anywhere.
But all of that being said, all of these are pointed at the gods of Egypt.
God Yahweh is wanting to show that he is the Lord.
Now to understand really the context of this, we have to understand the context of the ancient Near East, okay?
You got to understand how the world thousands of years ago worked in this time.
The way victory was seen, the way conquest was seen was that
Not only did you conquer a people, but you had to conquer their gods.
Right?
Gods were regional.
God, all the Egyptian had their god, the Syrians had their gods.
So, everybody had their own gods.
And when battle would go down, when war would happen, it was not only a battle of the people, it was a battle of their gods.
And you were a great people if you had the greatest god.
And it was that great, it was that God that gave you victory over another people.
So the way that you truly had victory over another people was not only would you conquer that people, but you would take their gods and you would bring them back to your gods, to your temples.
And that was the last form of defeat, okay?
For instance, you can think about when the Philistines take the Ark of the Covenant back to the temple, Daegon, right?
That was
Our God, the God of Philistines, Baal is stronger than Yahweh because we've won, right?
That's what was at stake there.
When Nebuchadnezzar will come and we'll take Israel captive, what will he also do?
Not only does he take the people, he goes into the temple and he takes the lampstands, he takes all the things of worship and he takes them back, okay?
He takes them back to the temples of his God to say, our God is stronger than your God.
Now think about this for a minute.
The Hebrew people in Egypt for 400 years were slaves.
So to the Egyptians, the God of Israel is weak.
Your people are slaves.
Our gods are much stronger than your God because your slaves to us.
If your God was real, if your God was really strong, you wouldn't be our slaves.
Not only is your God weak, you don't even know if you really have a God.
Why?
You can't see them.
Well, come to our temples.
We'll show you Osiris.
But look at Pharaoh, we'll show you Amunran.
We have all these idols.
We'll show you our gods.
You can't even see your God.
You don't even have a picture of him.
Your God is weak.
He, your slaves to us.
Yahweh goes, okay.
Game on, right?
Game on.
And he attacks every one of these gods.
The gods that they worship and hold the highest, Yahweh is going to attack.
And think about this.
Think about how this goes down.
He's going to attack them with an 80 year old man and an 83 year old man, one that can barely talk, one that scared the death.
And the other one's just got a stick and he's going to ruin and defeat all of their gods with that.
He's going to take them all down and think about this.
You know, and it's not just one time.
God, God could have wiped all of Egypt out.
We know he's going to do it at the very end.
One plague.
One nine, he could do all of Egypt, right?
He could crumble all of it.
And he's gonna do that, but he's not doing it.
Now, why does he do it?
Why does it take nine?
Why does he do it that way?
So you will know that the Lord is God and all these other deities that they worship aren't real and they're nowhere near as powerful as Yahweh, right?
Think about this.
In one way, let's just say this, baseball is better than football, okay?
Now let's think about it.
Why would you say that?
Well, in football,
It's kinda, you get one go at it, all right?
You know, I know a lot of tech fans were probably saying if we had you, you know, three more games, we're gonna win at least one or two of them, right?
Maybe not, right?
Right, I mean, right football is a Super Bowl, right?
You get one go at it.
The college football championship, right?
There's gonna be one game, it's gonna decide it all.
In baseball, you got a World Series, right?
You got seven games, because think about it.
One game, there could be a fight, and you couldn't even end the game.
Maybe you don't lose one.
The rest could be really bad that game.
I know that's what a lot of tech, right?
I mean, a lot of Auburn fans are saying today.
Right, there could be one game, it could be off.
Your team just couldn't be clicking, right?
The rest could be, it just couldn't be right.
You know, that could happen.
But in a series of games, right, you got a better chance of finding the real champion, right?
In seven games, somebody got to win four of them.
So you, overall, you're gonna find the better team.
Think about this game.
God says we're gonna play, and there's gonna be 10 rounds.
And he pitches a shutout, right?
I mean, all of them, right?
The magicians, they can do a little bit, right?
They can play just a little bit.
They can turn a little bit of the water into blood, right?
Oh, look, we got frogs everywhere.
We can make more frogs.
Oh, that's what we needed, more frogs.
Thanks a lot, guys, right?
And then the gnats, we can't do that, Pharaoh, sorry.
That's the finger of God.
Pharaoh, we got to tap out.
Okay.
We lost the other two.
We couldn't, we couldn't reverse it.
We couldn't, we couldn't match it to scale.
We didn't win that one, but we're totally done now.
And they're not even coming back.
They're defeated.
Pharaoh won't call on them again.
Yahweh has totally won hand.
I mean, think about this.
There's three spheres, right?
There's, there's the air, there's the land and there's the ocean, right?
The fears of, of, of this earth, right?
Well, you got the, the water,
He's conquered that all the gods in that he's conquered the land all of the land with the With the with the frogs right in the air with the net he's conquered every sphere every God they had all those gods right the gods of the guardian of the Nile Well, how did that go down God?
Well, he just totally turned it in a blood What about Osiris?
He's well if oh sorry if the now is
representing his blood, he's bleeding out, because it's not just in the Nile, it's everywhere.
Osiris is losing, he's dead.
Neath the protector of the fish.
Well, they're all dead and they stink, right?
And that's another thing.
Over, we were, so all this repeated, the Nile stinks, the land stinks and the frogs.
They take all the frogs finally, they gather them in a heap and they burn them and what, they stink.
Now, there's a play on words here in this whole narrative.
You remember in Exodus chapter five,
God, God tells Moses, he says, hey, go tell Pharaoh, let my people go.
This is the first time, go take the elders and they do that.
And Pharaoh says, no, in fact, I'm going to double your workload.
And the elders of Israel get mad and they go to Moses and they say, Moses, this is a chapter five verse 21.
Moses, you've made a stink.
You made a stink to Pharaoh, right?
God, this God of Yahweh, he doesn't know what he's doing, right?
Moses, you don't know what you're doing.
And, and I imagine, you know, here's what God's thinking is we see this play out here.
Here's God's plan.
Oh, I'm going to make you stink.
Oh, you are going to stink, but it's going to be in the best way possible.
Like I'm going to make it stink so bad.
Not only is Pharaoh going to hate you.
He's gonna hate me.
He's gonna hate everything.
He's gonna hate his own life.
I'm gonna make it really stink.
You're gonna stink in ways you don't know, right?
And that happens to us.
So many times in our life, we doubt God.
Well, God, I can't believe you're letting this happen.
God, I can't believe you wanted this to go down and we doubt God.
And usually in our life, when we doubt God, that's usually when God steps right in and he shows his faithfulness.
God, you're gonna make us, you make a stink to Pharaoh.
Yep, that's my plan.
And it's gonna be much worse than you think.
What?
This house go down, right?
And I'm going to conquer that way.
And so this is about God conquering, right?
This is about God conquering all these false idols.
Now, think about this.
Now this happens so that years later, and we're going to see this played out in Exodus, that the slaves will be able to tell their grandchildren, right?
If they come out of Egypt, the story that went down.
Now I told you to pay attention in chapter, chapter eight,
And look at verse eight, okay?
When Pharaoh comes to Moses and Aaron says, and treat the Lord that he may take away the frogs.
So Pharaoh, this may seem small, but Pharaoh comes to Moses and he asks Moses to go to God for him.
This is a big change in the narrative, okay?
Imagine a slave telling this story to his grandchildren.
Look, for 400 years son, our people were slaves.
They told us when to get up,
They told us where to work, where to live, what to eat, how to eat.
Everything, we were slaves every day.
But then Yahweh decided he was gonna redeem us.
And the man with all the power, all the authority, God so humbled him, Yahweh so humbled him that he come to Moses and ask Moses to pray to Yahweh.
You believe that?
How God did this?
How God brought the victory.
Now, all that being said, not only did God
Not only does he destroy in the idols in Egypt, not only is he showing his supremacy, but here almost maybe more importantly, he's only destroying idols.
He's destroying the idolatry in the heart of the Israelites.
Now think about this.
What's going to happen in chapter 33, 32?
After God redeems his people, he's going to take them to his mountain, Mount Sinai.
He's going to call Moses up to give him the law.
Okay.
What happens why Moses is getting the law?
What happens is down at the bottom, they form an idol, right?
Moses stayed too long on the mountain.
He goes back down and he finds that they now have a golden calf that they've made out of the gold they got and they're worshiping this calf.
And Moses breaks the 10 commandments.
He has to go get another, you remember this story.
See, the God brought him out of Egypt, but also the purpose of these plays is to take Egypt out of them.
Right?
Think about this for a minute.
For 400 years, they'd been in Israel.
They, they had forgot who to worship.
They had also forgot how to worship.
And truth be told, they didn't not yet know how to worship because they didn't have the temple.
They didn't have the law.
They didn't have a priesthood.
They didn't have the sacrificial system.
Moses, God's going to give them all of that.
They don't have that yet.
They didn't know how to worship.
So how did they worship?
Well, they had a worship the way that the Egyptians would have worshiped this pagan worship, this pagan idolatry.
Now, we can easily relate that to ourselves, can we?
to say that, how glorious and hope is it as Christian parents, that we would have kids that would grow up in Christian homes, with catechism, we have great people in our church that love them, care for them, teach them ways of the Lord, they learn it from us, and that they get to a place where they're following the Lord, and they love Jesus, and you say, hey, when did you become a Christian?
And they say, I don't really know.
I just, I love Jesus, I believe He died for my sins, and He's my Savior.
Well, when did you like, I don't know, that's the Christian parents' hope that they don't have to go live in the world and go through all the worst sins and cut, that's the Christian parents' hope, right?
Is that God's grace is not only what he brings you out of, but what he keeps you from, right?
That's what us Christian parents, that's what we want, that our kids would just believe in Jesus, love Jesus, and not really sure where the conversion happened, but know they love Jesus and follow him, okay?
That's our hope, okay?
That's our, that's our, however, that's not how most of us came to the Lord, is it?
Right?
Most of us came to the Lord in real utterness away from Him, right?
And when we come to the Lord, right, when He saved us, when we became Christians, we still had idolatry in our heart.
You know, anybody become a Christian and still have idolatry?
There are some things in this world that you became comfortable with, right?
There are some things that you were convinced that were true.
And when God saved you, He started changing those things in your life, right?
Now,
That's exactly what he's doing because think about what he's doing to the Israelites here.
See, God's not running for God in these plagues, right?
God's not trying to convince Pharaoh either.
He could kill Pharaoh, right?
This isn't that.
God is diminishing, demolishing the idolatry, right?
That's in Egypt and the idolatry that's in his people, right?
He's changing them, right?
And I found this definition of an idol this week.
Now, of course they had real live idols.
right of their gods and the Egyptians would go make an idol to worship and Moses become furious over that.
We'll talk more about that later as we go through this series.
But an idol, take this definition, anything that you give allegiance to that promises deliverance, fulfillness or security.
In other words, an idol can be anything, anything that you give allegiance to because of what it promises you.
Now if you think an idol is that, if you believe that's an idol, as you look around your own life, there's idols everywhere in our life.
Calvin said our heart is an idol factory.
Now we are an idol producing people.
And idols do promise things.
And idols are things that God gives us, can be things that God gives us that are good things.
Think about what the now was God's give to the Egyptian people.
The now was a good thing.
But what the devil does, what the enemy does is it takes a good thing and you twist it
right and and perverts it see the devil can come up with nothing new the enemy can come up all they do it he Satan is a pervert and that's what he does he takes things he takes good things that God gives us and he twisted perverts it right enemy and and it promises us things and we give allegiance to it for instance diet right eat healthy that's a great thing
That's a wonderful thing, right?
Our health is very profitable.
Bible tells us it's profitable.
However, if you hold on to, if you give allegiance to your, to health, simply because of the promise that it will give you health, that it will secure your health, that can become a, that can become an idol.
Finances, God's gives us money, money's a good thing, work is a good thing, earning money is a good thing.
But if you give allegiance to finances into money, because it promises you a future, it can become an idol, right?
Power.
Power is something that is a good thing that we're using godly way.
God has granted us all power and responsibility.
But however, if you hold on to power can give allegiance to power because it can dictate your future and the security future of others, then it can become an idol.
So we had to be careful that the good gifts of God, they don't, for instance, family.
Family is a good and precious gift.
Kids are good and precious gift of God, but they can easily become idols.
right?
If we put them in the wrong place in our life because health promises life, money can promise security, sex can promise fulfillment, right?
And all these, all these things are, sex is great.
God, it's a great thing inside of marriage.
Money is a wonderful thing.
Health's a wonderful thing.
But when we trust those things to give us life, security and fulfillment, they become idols.
Only God can give us life and health and security and satisfaction fulfillment.
Only, all those things are only found in God.
So we do need to search our heart, right?
And we do need to see the idols in our life.
And it is God's good graces that he points out to us, the idols that are in our life.
And the one way is God's grace to point this out.
Cause how do we know what something's in an idol?
When, when it goes wrong, right?
When, when something in our life that we, we put a lot of stake in a lot of stock in and it doesn't give us what it promised.
We cry like little children at the grocery store that didn't get what they want.
Right?
When we didn't get the security, we hoped money would offer, right?
The health when the doctor says, hey, here's actually what's going on.
Well, I did all these things and that was supposed to prompt.
See, when we don't get what the idols promised us, right, we pitch a fit because it made this promise to us.
And is God's good grace is that he shows us what those are in our life.
He highlights those to us.
That's what he's doing in Egypt.
He's showing his people all these gods, do not trust them.
Do not worship like them, right?
You have to worship me alone and no idols.
All of these things, all these gods can give you nothing.
They can't protect the Nile, they can't give you fertility, right?
They can't keep the gnats from coming.
They can't, only I can do that.
I'm sovereign God.
Now, how do we trust God?
How does he do this in his heart?
It's just like Nate said earlier in our worship.
We do it by seeing his character and his victory.
Now, turn with Colossians chapter two with me.
for us to fully understand the victory of the Lord, the power of our God.
It is highlighted in the New Testament for us.
Colossians chapter two, Colossians chapter two.
And Colossians chapter two, John, pop or say of this passage, we're going to look, we're going to start in verse 12.
Papa said that this passage, one of the best passages in the, in the Bible to describe to us what happened on Calvary.
It's one of the best passages for us to understand what really took place at Calvary.
I don't know.
Some people see that the cross was like the first half of the game and that's where Christ was defeated and at the resurrections where Christ, or Christ won the victory.
Well, that's not what the Bible teaches.
The Bible is going to teach us here that not only did Christ win the victory,
at the resurrection on Easter morning, but also on Good Friday, God won the victory on the cross.
The cross was also victorious there.
The cross is a banner of victory, not of defeat.
The cross is a banner of triumph.
And Colossians chapter two,
In verse 12, it talks about the resurrection of Christ, okay?
It talks about his, it says, we're buried with him in baptism, which you were raised with him through faith in the working of God who raised him from the dead.
Yes, and amen.
Christ was victorious over the grave.
Amen.
Okay, verse 13, and you being dead, were in your trespasses and the uncircumcision of your flesh, he made alive together with him.
How did he make us alive?
Having forgiven all
are trespasses by canceling the record of debt that stood against us with its legal demands.
This he set aside.
Look at verse 15.
This is the victory.
This is what happened on the cross.
He disarmed principalities and powers.
He made a public spectacle of them triumphing.
That is being victorious over them in it.
That is at the cross.
Now what was this passage saying verse 13?
It says that you
Christian, this is us, before we were in Christ, and if you're out of Christ, this is you, you were dead.
You're being dead in your trespasses and the uncircumcision of your flesh.
Being dead, all those outside of Christ are dead, born dead, still born.
All right, physical, alive, spiritually dead.
It's a metaphor in the Bible for those outside of Christ to understand their separation from God, right?
In the Garden of Eden, Adam and Eve sinned,
Right?
And they, God said, when you sin, you shall surely die.
But Adam and Eve didn't drop dead, did they?
They were kicked out of the garden because there's separation between them and God.
That was spiritual death.
But death also speaks of inability.
If you're outside of Christ, people, they can do nothing to save themselves.
They cannot come to God.
Jesus said in John six, unless the father draws you, you cannot come to me.
That doesn't mean that people who want to come to Jesus,
can't come.
But also there's nothing that won't to come.
That's the problem.
They're unable.
They have no desires to come.
But without God working, you see, economic success can't do it.
Academic achievement can't do it.
Self, you know, improvement, none of that can bring you to God.
None of that can help you.
If you're outside of Christ, there's nothing you can do in your flesh to save you.
There's nothing at all.
You can't do it, right?
But he does it, right?
That's what it says.
He made us alive together.
This is sovereign initiative.
This is God's victory.
This is God working by making us alive.
We are dead.
He brings us to life.
How does he do that?
He forgives all our trespasses.
That's better than what you think this morning.
That's better.
We need not to judge our life by how things are going here and now or what we have here and now.
All right.
We need to hang on to this that we have been forgiven
All of our trespasses.
What does it mean to be forgiven?
A few Bible verses.
Isaiah chapter 38 verse seven says, he has cast our sin behind his back.
Our sins are out of sight.
Our sins before the Lord, if you're in Christ, he's made you alive.
They are behind his back.
He doesn't see him.
Micah chapter seven verse 19, he's cast our sin into the depths of the sea.
All right.
Not only are they out of sight, our sins are out of reach.
I like what H.B.
Charles said about this.
He said, he's put up a no-fishing sign.
Our sins are cast into the ocean, right?
Not only are they out of sight and not only are they out of reach, but they're also out of mind.
Jeremiah chapter 31 verse 34, God says, I have forgiven their iniquities and I remember them no more.
Not only are they out of sight, they are out of reach, they are out of mind and they're out of existence.
Look what he said there.
We have been forgiven
of all of our trespasses.
Now think about it, your trespasses, your sins, what you did that you shouldn't have done, what you didn't do what you should have done, your attitude, your choices, every sin that you've committed, he has forgiven every one of them.
He didn't put a down payment on it.
He didn't put on a layer way like we used to have way back in the day, right?
None of that at all.
He didn't put it on a credit card.
He paid for all of it.
It is all gone.
What's the old, what's the old hymn say?
This, the bliss of this glorious thought that my sin not in part, but the whole was nailed to the cross and I bear it no more.
Praise the Lord.
Oh my soul.
All of it gone.
He is forgiven every bit of it.
Well, how'd he just let it go?
No, what did he do?
He says,
In verse 14, he canceled the record of our debt.
Now, we can infer from that there is a record of debt.
Your sin and my sin, there's a record of debt.
God's keeping record.
And in heaven, if you owe God, how are you gonna get away from that?
You can evade taxes, but how are you gonna invade heaven's court?
The IRS of heaven, how are you gonna get out of that?
And what debt do you owe God for every one of your sins?
Romans 6, 23.
The consequence of sin is
Death, death, right?
We have a debt with God.
We owe a debt to God, right?
But here's the wonderful thing about this.
What God demands of us, this death, He has provided for us in Christ, right?
Because what did He do?
It says that He canceled this record of debt that stood against us with its legal demands.
He said it aside.
He nailed it to the cross.
Your file, your record of debt,
Right?
You're a rap sheet.
Every sin, there's three things nailed to the cross, three things.
Jesus was nailed to the cross, right?
Physical body, God in the flesh, nailed to the cross.
The Bible says they nailed him on a hill called Golgotha, right?
They nailed him on a cross, they crucified him between two criminals.
Not only that, there was a sign, there was a sign on the side of it.
Pilate wrote it in his own handwriting.
There's King of the Jews.
He wrote in every language around Greek, Aramaic, Hebrew, Latin, every language.
And Jesus was crucified outside the city.
So all the travelers coming by would see that it said, this is king of the Jews.
Now, you remember the religious leaders, they went back to Pilate and they said, Pilate, you're going to have to take that down.
You're going to have to say, he claimed to be Pharaoh said, what I have written, I have written.
This is the king.
This is the Lord.
This is the king of the Jews.
That, so that sign and Jesus, but that's not the only thing nailed to the cross.
All of the spiritual realm, every demon, every angel, all the invisible forces of this world saw what was also nailed to that cross.
Your rap sheet, my rap, all the sins of his people was nailed to that cross.
The old timers used to say, Jesus paid a debt, he didn't owe because I owed a debt, I couldn't pay, right?
I love you.
Another one said,
God treated Jesus on that cross.
Um, the way he should have treated me so that he could treat me the way that Jesus deserves to be treated, right?
Adrian Rogers, you say one old boy come out of Sunday school and he's talking about what his teacher talking about what it was like to be safe.
He said, it's like, uh, Jesus is in my shoes and I'm in his shoes.
Graham, cause Jesus took our sin debt.
on the cross and God poured his wrath upon it, his just wrath.
He nailed it to the cross.
But all that happened, right?
The spiritual realm seen that.
How do you know that's what the spiritual, look at verse 15.
What happened on the, this is what really happened on the cross.
He disarmed every pincipality and power.
He made a public spectacle of them, triumphing over them and in.
Now I've made a lot of, tried to make a lot of noise about
Last week Pharaoh was a symbol of the serpent.
He had that Cobra headdress all the way that prophecy in Genesis 3 15 that the serpent shall bruise the heel of the sea of the woman, but the sea of the woman shall crush his head.
What happened on the cross?
Satan took his best shot at Christ, took his best shot, but when he saw that our sins were nailed to that cross, it was too late.
He crud, he hurt the heel of the seat of the woman, but Christ crushed his head on that cross.
How?
It said he disarmed him.
He made a public spectacle of him.
This was a word picture in that day when there was no seeing, there was no Fox News.
All right, there was no war.
You didn't know how the war was going on by turning the TV on or looking on X, okay, or googling it, right?
You didn't have any of that.
How did you know what was going on?
Well, when the Romans would, would, would conquer somebody, they had to take prisoners and they'd come into the city and they'd parade the prisoners behind them, say, look guys, we conquered them.
We won't proof, look at them.
They're in chains.
Paul saying on the cross, Jesus took prisoners.
Now, how is it said he disarmed them?
Now, Satan is a pervert.
I said that earlier, but he's an imitator, but he's also an accuser.
The word Satan actually means to be an accuser.
What is it that Satan has done every day while we've been on this earth?
He's went before the father and he's accused you over and over and over again.
You know what Brad did today?
You know what Katrina did today?
You know what Jenny did today?
You know what Emily did today?
You know what Gary did today?
How can you love them?
How can you love these people?
They're sinners.
You're a holy God.
How do you not destroy them and do it?
That's what he did with Job.
Job only worships you because of what you give him.
He's a great sinner, right?
What did Satan say to Peter?
Satan is asked to see if you like we.
He's just, you're nothing Peter to him, right?
He does nothing but accuse us all the time before the throne of God, but he's disarmed.
How is it?
because all of our sins were nailed to the cross.
He's got, he can accuse all he wants.
It won't stand in the court of heaven because our sins have been paid for because Christ has won the victory on that cross because he paid for him.
That's good news.
Now our enemy is real.
He needs to be respected, right?
He is a roaring lion going and seeing Peter tells us who he can devour.
We need to respect our enemy.
He's a real powerful enemy.
He's a deceiver.
He's an intimidated, right?
All these things are true.
We need to know that.
We need to add one more thing to the list though.
He is defeated.
He is a defeated foe.
Christ defeated him on the cross.
Let's pray.
Father, thank you that we have victory in Christ, that we are more than conquerors through him who conquered hell, sin, death and the grave, not only at the resurrection, but also on calvary.
So Father, we thank you that we see that you are supreme, that you are preeminent, that you are all powerful,
So Father, help us to check our own hearts today.
Any idols that we trust in, anything that we try to find security, satisfaction, joy outside of you knowing that only you bring true fulfillment.
So Father, give us all the more confidence to trust you in the days ahead and glorify you.
We ask in Jesus' name.
Amen.
Thank you for listening to this sermon from Harvest Baptist Church.
For more information about the church, please visit our website, harvestbc.church.
If you would like to contact us, please email us at contact.harvestbc.gmail.com or you can call us at 706-780-2211.
If you were looking for a church home or visiting the North Georgia area, we would love for you to join us on a Sunday morning.
at 9.30 in the fellowship hall for breakfast and Sunday school, and then at 11 a.m. for our Lord's Day worship service.
We hope that you have a great week.
God bless.